---
layout: page
title: Somerville YIMBY 2021 Voter Guide and Endorsements
permalink: /2021/election/
---
_Published: <time datetime="2021-08-20T16:14:00-0400">Aug 20, 2021</time>_  
_Last Updated: <time datetime="2021-09-16T19:04:00-0400">Sep 16, 2021</time>_

Somerville YIMBY circulated a short survey to candidates for mayor and city council this summer. While all candidate surveys are limited in scope and necessarily simplify complex issues, our survey definitely erred on the side of over-simplification, especially in trying to squeeze Yes/No answers out of complex questions. We received excellent feedback from our respondents, and we acknowledge that it has a number of shortcomings. Please use this as a supplement to your own decisions.

We have also provided our endorsements and an explanation of them below. Our baseline goal is to find candidates who, regardless of their ideological background, intend to:

* Increase the total amount of housing in the city
* Move the city away from auto-centric development and excessive parking
* Enhance tenant protections

First, we present each candidate’s survey responses, linked from their name as a PDF. Following this list we elaborate on our choices for endorsement, as well as other candidates we feel would make good elected officials.

_Incumbents are indicated with an \*_

_Candidates who did not proceed past the preliminary election on Sep 14, 2021 have been removed for clarity._

_Endorsements are in **bold**._

## Candidates

* ### Mayoral Election

    * **[Katjana Ballantyne](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-KcQV-E3IdwVQegkFd9OxqLWB_efZbYS/view?usp=sharing)**
    * Wilfred “Will” Mbah (no answers provided)

* ### At-large

    * **[Willie Burnley Jr](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-efNkIbd62zl6hvzmKVRrqHe7bRjtZ-c/view?usp=sharing)**
    * [Virginia Hussey](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-dA-IAL4vYjGQX2WyClC9a02oPTH_C0m/view?usp=sharing)
    * **[Charlotte Kelly](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-W5LvOF0nyTspp5-toR0v1sPGJoCAzSH/view?usp=sharing)**
    * [Justin Klekota](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-SFMjD-4ou254AQEPw_RzhgwX-JG0QHc/view?usp=sharing)
    * [Tracey Leah Pratt](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-cv0306ME1mZIIXiK9f9n7yNjS2dGpIb/view?usp=sharing)
    * Eve Seitchik (no answers provided)
    * [Kristen Strezo \*](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-WZq9gTbzRZU68LU9r7pNDrBg5eE5T92/view?usp=sharing)
    * **[Jake Wilson](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-gAVQcnNBN9ueWj-XiXTOwzGzDJIifly/view?usp=sharing)**

* ### Ward 1

    * Matt McLaughlin \* (no answers provided)

* ### Ward 2

    * [Stephenson Aman](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-bhoHRNfIj-VNLiKcCzKfqM9Jzplg7al/view?usp=sharing)
    * [JT Scott \*](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-LhDukn3OYTsUAttv70zU9Fq1-8l_YEw/view?usp=sharing)

* ### Ward 3

    * **[Ben Ewen-Campen \*](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-LEMnRxNOvwfTnfPUHJ8ebbd8jVfm8qB/view?usp=sharing)**

* ### Ward 4

    * Jesse Clingan \* (no answers provided)

* ### Ward 5

    * [Tessa Bridge](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-k89jnkD2BZrgpU4q7nY746D488f_8pj/view?usp=sharing)
    * **[Beatriz Gómez-Mouakad](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-aInfhVwdcptVOeoQJEw1yLsKr7aZG4n/view?usp=sharing)**

* ### Ward 6

    * Lance Davis \* (no answers provided)

* ### Ward 7

    * [Becca Miller](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-gZW8SgYbfnKQjlNOSjPkKhkh51geAl4/view?usp=sharing)
    * **[Judy Pineda Neufeld](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-ZkO5Bqbl9cj5g6dafnGbc4NIan4CGGw/view?usp=sharing)**

* * *

Here, we present some additional context on each candidate we endorsed, as well as candidates we consider good choices, even though we did not feel confident endorsing them.

## Mayor

Somerville has three very good candidates for mayor this year, and we would not be disappointed to see Katjana Ballantyne, Mary Cassesso or Will Mbah in the mayor’s office this fall. We did, however, ultimately decide to endorse Katjana & Mary.

### Endorse

#### Katjana Ballantyne

Katjana supports our three key goals of housing production, reducing auto-dependence, and enhancing tenant protections. Our conversation with her and her comments on our survey gave us a great deal of confidence about her thoughtful and informed understanding of the intersection of commercial development, tax base, climate change, and funding for affordable housing. She also has the most experience on city council.

### Of Note

#### Will Mbah

##### **Updated Monday, Sep 13, 10:23 AM**

On Aug 31, [“Somerville Mayoral Candidates on Rent Control”](https://binjonline.com/2021/08/31/somerville-mayoral-candidates-on-rent-control/) was published by Boston Institute for Nonprofit Journalism, and Will had this to say:

> “Some will argue that this housing crisis is one we can build our way out of: If we simply allow developers to build more apartments with little to no regulation, the cost of rent will decrease and become affordable to working class families. One only has to look at the skyrocketing rental prices that have resulted from this approach to know it is untrue. It is the same logic used by advocates of trickle-down economics and those who oppose increasing the minimum wage.”

We disagree with this very strongly. Housing supply is nothing like “trickle-down economics”, since it’s not about the willingess of the wealthy corporations to invest in their workers via lower taxes, but instead about ensuring that we have an abundance of homes, so high-income people do not compete with everyone else for the existing, limited supply of homes. We’re disappointed to see Will take this position.

To be clear, we also support strong tenant protections including rent stabilization, but they need to be paired with an abundance of homes.

_Our originally published statement on Will, for reference, is below:_

Will didn’t fill out our survey, but we spoke with him about the issues. He too is aligned with Somerville YIMBY on increasing housing, moving away from auto-centric patterns, and strengthening tenant protections. He’s an important voice in the city and his emphasis on creating community benefits for large projects is excellent. He has spent less time on City Council than Katjana Ballantyne, but his record as a councilor has been excellent. We are, however, slightly concerned about a plan to [increase inclusionary zoning requirements he mentioned in a recent WGBH article](https://www.wgbh.org/news/politics/2021/08/04/whats-at-stake-in-somervilles-mayoral-race). We feel that raising the requirement above 20% risks becoming counterproductive by reducing the total amount of housing produced, harming people who need subsidized and market-rate housing alike.

## Councilor At-large

We have chosen to endorse Willie Burnley Jr, Charlotte Kelly, and Jake Wilson.

Eve Seitchik, Justin Klekota and Kristen Strezo are also good choices.

### Endorse

#### Willie Burnley Jr

Willie is in support of our key goals on increasing housing, moving away from auto-centric development, and enhancing tenant protections. He is more skeptical of market-rate housing than we are, but his approach to all the issues is deeply thought and nuanced. We believe that he would be an excellent City Councilor.

#### Charlotte Kelly

Charlotte aligns with us on creation of affordable housing, moving away from auto-centric development, and tenant protections. She is much more skeptical of market-rate housing than we are, but we feel that she’s still a great choice. Her response notes that “any serious approach to housing and development here in Somerville must have thoughtful processes rooted in equity, justice, and systemic solutions,” and we agree entirely.

#### Jake Wilson

Jake aligns with us on housing production, transit/parking issues, and tenant protections. His written responses reflect a nuanced approach to development and other issues and an acknowledgement of the tradeoffs necessary in governance. For example, he noted that to achieve our goal of increasing the amount of green space in the city, we’ll also need tall buildings to balance it.

### Also Good

#### Justin Klekota

Justin agrees with us about housing and tenant protections, but supports building more parking, which is counterproductive for both climate and traffic.

#### Eve Seitchik

Eve did not complete our survey, but we spoke with them briefly about the issues. Critically, they agree with us about the need to create affordable housing, and on climate and transit issues. Although we disagree with them about the relative value of market-rate housing production, Eve is a thoughtful and forceful advocate for climate, transit and housing justice.

#### Kristen Strezo

Kristen’s survey answers state that she aligns with us on housing production, transit/parking issues, and tenant protections. She does not support reallocating police funding to housing and social services. She is also the sole incumbent running for an at-large seat.

## Ward 1

#### Matt McLaughlin

Matt is running unopposed & did not respond to our survey, so we have not prepared an analysis of his positions.

## Ward 2

We like both of these candidates and think that either would do an excellent job.

#### Steph Aman

Steph supports increased housing and tenant protections, and we also like his emphasis on trees and green space. We disagree with him about parking issues. His track record as a community organizer and activist is excellent and we are confident that he’d do a good job as a councilor as well. He was also a co-chair of the SomerVision 2040 committee, and his experience there would be very valuable on the City Council.

#### JT Scott

JT aligns with us on housing, transit/parking, and tenant protections. He is very skeptical of market-rate housing, but has an excellent track record of building community engagement to reach effective goals. His work guiding the project at 346 Somerville Ave (the former J.J. Sullivan building) to an excellent and unconventional outcome is a great example of his pragmatic approach. He was one of several candidates to push back against the oversimplification in our survey, and made several excellent points in our conversation about it.

## Ward 3

### Endorse

#### Ben Ewen-Campen

Ben is running unopposed, but answered our survey anyway. He aligns with all three of our core issues, and his written comments reveal a very thoughtful approach to city government.

## Ward 4

#### Jesse Clingan

Jesse is running unopposed & did not respond to our survey, so we have not prepared an analysis of his positions.

## Ward 5

We have chosen to endorse Beatriz Gómez Mouakad, although Tessa Bridge would also be a good choice.

### Endorse

#### Beatriz Gómez Mouakad

Beatriz aligns with us on increasing overall housing supply, addressing transit/parking issues, and tenant protections. We feel that her experience working on affordable housing for Just-A-Start means that she knows both how important affordable housing is, and how to create it. She told us that she would prioritize affordable housing over market rate, but recognizes the need to make that housing economically viable through mixed-use and mixed-income development.

### Also Good

#### Tessa Bridge

Tessa is supportive of affordable housing and tenant protections, but not of market-rate housing. She’s also a great advocate for people with disabilities. In her written comments she noted that while she supports many of our positions in general, it is important to include an equity focus when considering any of them — and we agree with that.

## Ward 6

#### Lance Davis

Lance is running unopposed & did not respond to our survey, so we have not prepared an analysis of his positions.

## Ward 7

Three of these candidates seem very good, but we have chosen to endorse Judy Pineda Neufeld.

### Endorse

#### Judy Pineda Neufeld

Judy aligns with us on increasing housing supply, addressing transit/parking issues, and tenant protections. She supports added density near GLX stations to create more affordable housing, an expansion of the Affordable Housing Overlay, and reduced mandatory parking requirements.

### Also Good

#### Becca Miller

Becca aligns with us on housing, transit and tenant protections but is much more skeptical of market-rate housing.

* * *

If you’ve read all the way through, thanks for taking the time! We hope this is a helpful resource, and we welcome any feedback you might have at&nbsp;[steering@somervilleyimby.org](mailto:steering@somervilleyimby.org?subject=2021 Election Guide).
